For Flutter, I mentioned that one important part would be that we add this authentication screen
and since this is a rather complex screen and I don't want to waste too much time on building yet another
UI and widget tree, I attached a file to this lecture here, the auth_screen.dart file which you simply
can drag and drop into that screen folder.
Now of course, I'll walk you through that file,
no worries, I'll explain what happens in there,
what I built in there but add that file to your screens folder and then let's have a look at it. In that
file, I import dart:math, you'll see why in a second I import material.dart of course and I set up my
own enum which I'll basically use to switch between two different auth modes that will influence on which
kind of form we're showing. We're either signing up or we're logging in and depending on the mode that
was chosen, we have a different label on the button,
we also show an extra confirm password input in sign up mode,
things like that change
and for that, I use an enum down in the code.
Then we have the AuthScreen class here which is a stateless widget,
I have a routeName, my static const routeName here, so that we can register this in the route table
which we'll do in a second,
then the build method and in there,
I just fetch my device size from MediaQuery.of(context) size,
we did this earlier in the course too. Then here, we have scaffold widget with a stack widget as a body, we
learned about the stack as well,
it allows you to place items on top of each other in a three dimensional space basically
and then the bottommost widget here is a container which actually has a box decoration that sets up
a linear gradient. I also covered linear gradients earlier,
this basically allows you to create a gradient between two colors
and these are simply two such colors.
Basically a linear gradient as we used it before
and then the other item I stack above the gradient basically is a SingleChildScrollView with a container
inside of it which I simply use to configure the height and the width to take the full device height
and width and in there, a column and that column here has centered content as you can tell, to center
the authentication form in the middle as you will soon see
and then there in my children, I have a flexible wrapper around my container which basically displays
the title, the title my shop,
you could use any title you want but if I scroll up a bit, you see there's something interesting. Besides
a margin and a padding,
I do this, I have the transform argument there and then this strange code and we have seen neither of
that. Now transform is an argument which the container supports out of the box which allows you to transform
how that container is presented.
It allows to rotate the container, to scale it or to move it,
of course it has a certain position on the screen and with transform, you could also offset it by a certain
amount on either axis.
Now what's this code here?
This configures how this container should be transformed and if you hover over transform, you see that
transform takes a Matrix4 object. Matrix4 is a class built into Flutter, provided by the material.dart
file and in the end, it's an object that describes the transformation of a container. Matrix4 simply
allows you to describe rotation, scaling and offset of a container all in one object,
so it's a big bundle of information that contains information about how to position and change transform
that container.
Now to configure that, I use the rotationZ constructor here which constructs a new Matrix4 object
as you can see here and this object has a certain rotation, here I use pi and pi is provided by the
dart:math package which is the number pi, 3.14 and so on and I use pi here to calculate a rotation
basically, a slight angle by which I want to rotate this. rotationZ means that I rotate along the
z-axis.
If we have a look at our device, then we have three axis there -
the x-axis is left to right, y-axis top to bottom and the z-axis is basically into the device.
So if you're holding the phone in your hand, the z-axis would be from your eyes through the device,
right so into the device in three dimensional space.
Now this spinner here is rotating around the z-axis.
If I place my mouse here in the middle of it, then you could imagine that the z-axis goes through
the device at the point where my mouse is placed,
so it's going from your face through the device and this circle is spinning around that axis.
If you imagine the axis like a stick you stick into the phone, then the spinner would go around it, it would
rotate around the z-axis.
So if you rotate something around the z-axis, that means you don't create a 3D effect which you would
do if you rotate around the y or x-axis because that would always rotate the element such that it feels
like it's coming out of the screen, instead it keeps the two dimensional look but it's simply shifts it
a bit, it gets a slight angle and you'll see how it works in a second of course once we see that screen.
Now what's strange here is this ..translate syntax though, this is a syntax we haven't seen before
in the course. We know that we can of course chain method calls together, for example here I can add a
dot and then here, I could call translate.
So the Matrix4 object which rotationZ returns has a translate method as it seems. Now I'm doing
this translate call here basically because I don't just want to rotate this, I also want to offset it
a little bit and translate is a method that offsets the object or that adds some offsetting configuration
to the Matrix4 object.
The problem with translate just is translate does not return a new Matrix4 object but it returns
void.
So if I call .translate here and I pass my argument like -10 in here, then here this overall
chain, if we comment this out, this overall chain removes void. Transform doesn't want void though,
it wants a Matrix4 object and this chain doesn't return a Matrix4 object anymore because this
here returns
basically what the last method in the chain returns and that is void, the dot dot operator fixes that.
It's a special operator which Dart has, not every programming language has that and the dot dot operator
basically calls translate on that object but does then not return what translate would return but it returns
what the previous statement returned,
so what rotationZ returned and the longer form of writing this to make that really clear would be
that up here for example, you create your transformConfig, whatever you want to name it and there,
you call Matrix4.rotationZ with the value we have down there, so let's say grab this value we have
there.
So now we have a Matrix4 object which is configured to rotate and now we could use transformConfig
and call translate on that and add -10.0.
Now translate is simply a method that does not return a new object but that edits the object on which
it is called and we of course have similar things in our app, for example in the products.dart file, we
have in the end a products class here and all the methods we have in there, like fetch and set products
don't return new or updated versions of this products class, they instead change the product class from
inside, here for example in the end, we overwrite the items property of the products class. So here we
are changing our object from inside and translate does the exact same thing,
it changes the Matrix4 object on which you call it from inside.
Now that's fine here where we store this in a variable and then in a second line, we call something on
that variable and therefore the value is stored and the variable is still the same object but now also
with that change taken into account and you could use that transformConfig down there as a value for
transform and it would work. There's nothing wrong with doing it like this but to avoid having to set
this up up there across multiple lines,
you can use this double dot notation because this basically allows you to have a statement that would
normally take a variable and two lines of code in one line without a variable because you don't return
what translate returns but you instead return what the previous method returned,
in this case what this constructor returned which is a Matrix4 object
and then you just execute this on this object before it is actually used here in the argument.
So you added an object in memory just as if it were stored in a variable which you now call something
onto edit it and then this edited object is returned here but you don't return what translate would
return,
that's what the cascade operator as it is called does. It simply is a replacement for having an extra
variable and multiple lines of code just to set something up and then call something on that and then
use the originally set up object. That was a lot of talking about this but it is important to understand
the syntax, other than that, here is nothing spectacular, just little bit of box shadow set up, then a
title here with a font, the Anton font which we already added earlier and that's it, almost. Down there,
I'm rendering another widget, the AuthCard widget.
The AuthCard widget resides in the same file and this is a stateful widget,
it's a stateful widget which holds the authentication form. Hence here,
I set up my form key,
I also control the AuthMode we're currently in because this class here, this widget here also has a button
to switch between the two auth modes, switch between sign up and login.
I have isLoading here, that should
be a var, so that we can control whether we're currently loading or not and show a loading
spinner if appropriate and I have an extra password controller in here which you'll see in a second why
I have it here,
this is of course connected to my password form field which you'll find below.
Here we have the submit method which will eventually be called, we are doing validation and if validation
fails, we just return and don't continue.
If we do continue,
so if validation succeeded, we save all inputs which you learned will trigger the onSave method on the
inputs and then in the end here, we're setting the loading spinner.
Here is a snippet or a part where we have to add code to then send a login or sign up request based
on which mode we're in and that's it.
Then I have another method,
switchAuthMode which basically switches from login to sign up mode or the other way around and reflects
that in the UI
by calling set state and if we go down further, we have the build method. There
again, I get the device size, below that I have the card with rounded borders with the built-in rounded
rectangle border shape or class which I use here as a value for the shape.
Then the container here, some height assigned to the container,
the height depends on the AuthMode because I have to increase the container in height
if we also render an extra confirm password field. Then we have a form down there with our form key,
it's scrollable, has a column in there because we have multiple inputs and then here, I have my text
form field for the e-mail with some basic validation that simply checks whether there is an @ symbol
in the e-mail or not.
Of course having an @ doesn't automatically make that a valid e-mail,
you could use more complex regular expression validation here if you wanted to but I wanted to keep
this code short and concise.
Then here's the onSave method which saves the value the user entered in an AuthData map
in the end, it's this map we have up there. So here I save the entered e-mail and password in the
end. If we go down further,
here's the password input field where I check that it's at least six characters long and not empty of
course
and here, the passwords text editing controller is assigned too and this controller is used in conjunction
with the last text form field which is only rendered if we're in sign up mode, so now when we are logging
in but if we're signing up because there, users should confirm the password and here by the way also
on the other password field,
I have obscure text set to true which makes sure that the input isn't shown to the user but we have
some stars masking the user input, that's an important side note.
But back to the text editing controller, here in the validation of the confirm password
text form field, there I check whether the value entered into this form field is equal to the value
entered in the other password field, so that only if these two are equal,
this field here is treated as valid. And with that, SizedBox for some spacing, potentially
we show a loading indicator or alternatively if we're not loading, I show a button which either shows
login or sign up as a label
depending on the mode that was chosen by the user and the button has some rounded corners here, something
you can set up on a RaisedButton here with the shape argument, some padding, a color, a text color and that's
it.
This button will in the end when we press it call the submit method.
We also have a second button, a FlatButton below the submit button here which allows you to switch between
sign up and login mode,
the label of the button changes appropriately to tell you what you change to, it triggers the switch
AuthMode function or method which I have up there and I have MaterialTapTargetSize set up here to
basically just shrink the button a little bit.
This will,
you could say, reduce the amount of surface you can hit with your finger to trigger that button, it will
still be large enough but it simply makes it a bit smaller and look nicer in my opinion.
That is the AuthScreen. Besides the things I explained,
nothing we haven't used thus far,
let's now register it in our routes table and also make it our home route because for
now, that should be the main screen users see when they enter our app because users do have to authenticate
before they can start using the app.
So here in the main.dart file, we can simply import from the screens folder and import that
auth_screen.dart file and with that, we can go down there and here make that our home screen, the AuthScreen
and therefore actually we don't even need to add it to the routes table.
So here, that's the AuthScreen,
if you now save this and start this app on your emulator, you should see that this auth screen is the first
thing that's presented to you in that app,
so let's wait for that to restart and have a look at that.
Here it is,
this is the AuthScreen,
this is basically what this auth_screen.dart file which I gave you renders. This is the transform title with
that slight rotation, feel free of course to play around with the values set up there, in the transform
setup there to see how that changes the look.
And this is the AuthCard, this form here in login mode which is the default, we see e-mail and password,
if we go to sign up, we see confirm password as well.
So this is what we have there,
now let's make sure that users can sign up.